We have seen that we can use linear programming
as a technology to solve a
number of problems and formally this involves
what we call a reduction.
So, rather than reducing to linear programs,
let us look at how we can actually reduce
to network flows which we saw already could
be reduced to linear programs. So, here is
a problem which seems to have nothing to do
with flow. So, we have some course allocation
to be done in a school, we have a collection
of teachers and we have a collection of courses
and each teacher has indicated a preference
of which courses he or she is willing to teach.
So, here we have 4 teachers Abbas, Chitra,
Madan and Sunitha and we have four courses
Math, History, Biology and Economics. So,
Abbas for instances is willing to teach History
and Biology, so that is these two edges, so
this indicates that Abbas is with teaching
these courses. Similarly, for a since if we
can look at Madan, Madan is happy to teach
History or Economics. So, each teacher has
indicated as a collection of courses that
he or she is willing to teach.
Now, what we have to do is allocate theses
courses to the teachers. Obviously, each course
is going to be taught by exactly one teacher,
but also we would like that each teacher teaches
only one course and that course should be
something that the teacher is willing to teach.
So, we would not like an allocation for example,
which ask Abbas to teach Math, because he
has indicated that he is not comfortable in
teaching Math. So, we want to find such an
allocation that each course is taught by a
single instructor, each instructor teaches
only one course and that is a course which
he or she is willing to teach.
So, this is what is called as a matching problem,
in particular it is called bipartite matching.
So, what is a bipartite graph? Bipartite graph
is which one in which the vertices come in
two groups which we called v 0 and v 1 and
all the edges go from v 0 to v 1. So, there
are no edges inside v 0, so there are no edges
inside v 1. So, this is an example here, so
this program to the teachers are v 0 and the
courses are v 1, now there are no edges between
courses, there are no edges between teachers,
all the edges are from a teacher to a course.
Now, what we have asked is to find an allocation.
What will an allocation do? An allocation
will pick an edge and say for instance that
Abbas will teach History. And once Abbas is
for been assigned History, then this means
that this edge cannot be taken anymore, because
Abbas cannot be assigned anything else, it
also means that this edge cannot be taken,
nobody else can get assigned this, this edge
cannot be taken.
So, we want to find edges, such that no two
of them share an end point. In this example,
if two of them share an end point on the left,
it means that the same teacher is being asked
to teach two courses. If there is two edges
share an end point on the right, it means
that the same course is being taught by two
different teachers, either of it is which
we want. So, we want a matching, we want a
matching which is a subset of edges, so that
no two of them share an end point.
And in particular, if we have an equal number
of nodes on each side in a bipartite graph,
then we can expect or hope that everything
on the left is matched to something on the
right. If we do not have an equal number of
course, something has been left out. But each
edge would match out two people, suppose we
have a five teachers and four courses, then
one teacher will not teach a course or we
have four teachers and five courses, then
some course will not be taught unless the
teacher take two courses.
But you have four teachers and four courses,
you could ask whether there is a way of matching
them up, so that every teacher teaches a course
and every course is taught by a teacher. This
is what is called a perfect match. So, what
has this got to do with network flows?
So, here is how we can answer this question
using network flows. We add a spurious source
node feeding into the teachers and we add
a spurious target node, a sink node coming
out of the courses. So, implicitly all our
edges are now going from left to right, so
we have the direction, so we are trying to
flow something from left to right. Now, what
we want is to assign capacity one to everything,
so every edge in this has capacity one.
So, supposing we find a maximum flow, so our
maximum flow will select some subset of these
teachers, hopefully all of them. Because it
is a flow that flow will go into a teacher
and out of a teacher, so it will select one
of these edges, so this one. And therefore,
now it will flow from this out here, now because
the output can only take one, I can only flow
1 from History to the sink, it cannot allow
another thing to coming from here.
So, if I had a flow 1 here and flow 1 here,
then 2 would have to flow out to the History,
but I have got it. So, I’m putting a flow
capacity of 1 on all the edges and I am sure
that exactly one teacher and one course can
be selected in the matching. And now, if you
maximize this flow, it maximizes the number
of teachers who are connected to their courses
and therefore it maximizes the matching. So,
we have managed to take a problem involving
something very different involving graphs
and model it using network flows.
So, this is a general example of what we call
a reduction. So, we want to solve a given
problem, problem A, but we do not know how
to solve it, but we do know how to solve another
problem B. So, in our case this is matching
and this is flow. So, what we do is we transform
that problem from matching to flow. So, we
take our matching problem and then we add
a source, we add a sink, we add capacities
convert it into a flow problem.
So, having converted it into flow problem,
we solve it, so this is the diagram shown
below, we have an algorithm for B. So, now,
we have a matching input, we convert it into
a flow input, this is a flow solution that
comes out and now we look at the flow solution
wherever, we see a one that is our matching,
whenever we see a zero that is not it our
matching. So, from that we get a matching
solution. So, we can involve the solution
from the inner problem to get a solution to
the outer problem. So, this is a reduction.
So, we say that a reduces to B. To solve A,
I can convert it to B and solve B in state.
And therefore, if I have an efficient solution
for B and if this conversion process is efficient,
then the process is setting up the problem
for B and interpreting the answer are both
efficient. Then, that is the efficiency of
the algorithm for B compose with the efficiency
of the pre processing and the post processing
step will give us an efficient algorithm for
A. So, without directly attacking A, I indirectly
found an efficient algorithm for A by exploiting
the existence of an algorithm for B.
So, as we said before our example that we
did in this lecture says that bipartite matching
in this way reduces to max flow. Now, what
we saw, last time it was that max flow itself
reduces to linear program, but the key is
that the pre processing and the post processing
must be efficient. When we went from max flow
to linear programming, what we did was we
introduce one variable f e for each edge e.
So, therefore that is an efficient translation,
because it produces the linear program whose
size is comparable to the input graph for
max flow.
Earlier, we had seen a example of network
bandwidth, where we produce a linear program
which require one variable per path in the
network, that could not be an efficient reduction,
because that would require an exponential
amount of work to construct the linear program
and to read the program. So, therefore, we
have to be careful in order to if we had,
the only intention of it to solving the problem
is one thing to convert a problem, but if
we want to exploit the efficiency aspect,
then the translation to and from the inner
problem must also be efficient.
So, we will see that another interpretation
of reduction also useful for us. So, what
we have seen is that if A reduces to B, then
B is efficient then this implies that A is
also efficient, because I can use the solution
for B as a solution for A. But supposing I
have that this is not efficient or not known
to be efficient, if I have some reason to
suspect that there is no efficient way to
do A, then if can show that A can be reduced
to B, then this also means that B cannot be
efficient.
Because if it could be done efficiently, we
know that we can do way efficiently, but we
have a reason to believe that A cannot be
done efficiently. So, reduction can be used
depending on the way in which we exploited
either to transfer a positive result from
B to A or a negative result from A to B, that
is A is not known to be efficient, B also
is not known to be efficient.
So, in this last couple of lectures what we
have seen are two, what I would call, Big
hammers. So, we have linear programming and
network flows. We actually express network
flows in terms of linear program, but network
flows independently are a very powerful modeling
formalization. So, many algorithmic problems
can actually be reduced to one of these two,
either you can set up variables in a set of
linear program or you can take a graph erratic
problem and modulate it using flows.
And the nice thing about this is that linear
programming and network flows are both very
standard problems for which people have interested,
have lot of time to write general purpose
tools which solve this problem. So, you can
set up an arbitrary linear program, arbitrary
network flow give it to the tool, then the
tool will give you an answer. So, you have
efficient of the self implementations. So,
in many practical situations rather than try
and solve an algorithmic problem directly,
it does often make sense to think of whether
it can be modeled as a linear program or a
network flow and then use an off-the-shelf
package to solve it.
But of course, you have to be able to express
the problem in terms of one of these things.
So, in order to understand whether you can
do so or not, you need to spend some time
analyzing what can and cannot be expressed
in linear programs. In linear program, the
crucial thing is that the constraints must
be linear functions. Sometimes, your constraints
which referred to the product to two variables,
this is not a linear function.
Similarly, in network flows you have to make
sure that you can actually model it as a source
to target flow, it cannot be something going
around and around in the network. So, within
these constraints; however, both of these
are extremely useful generic problems for
which efficient solutions do exist and which
can be exploited in a large number of situations
to solve the given problem at hand.